{\rtf1\ansi
FIREWALL RULE POLICY & PROCEDURE (TOOL-AGNOSTIC)\par
\par
1. PURPOSE\par
This policy defines how firewall rules are requested, approved, implemented, and reviewed to ensure secure, controlled, and auditable network access.\par
\par
2. SCOPE\par
This policy applies to:\par
- All firewall-like controls (e.g., network firewalls, host firewalls, cloud security filters, VPN gateways, web application protections).\par
- All environments (production, staging, test, development).\par
- All employees and contractors who request, approve, implement, or review firewall rules.\par
\par
3. ROLES\par
Requestor: Person requesting the firewall change (e.g., developer, system administrator, business user).\par
System Owner: Person accountable for the system, application, or data affected by the rule.\par
IT/Security Lead: Person responsible for security oversight and risk decisions for firewall changes.\par
Firewall Administrator: Person responsible for implementing and maintaining firewall rules.\par
\par
Note: One person may hold multiple roles, but the person implementing a rule must not be the sole approver.\par
\par
4. CORE POLICY REQUIREMENTS\par
Least Privilege:\par
- Allow only the minimum required ports, protocols, sources, and destinations.\par
- Avoid overly broad access (e.g., any source, large address ranges) unless strictly justified and approved.\par
\par
Business Justification:\par
- Every firewall rule must have a documented business reason.\par
\par
Traceability:\par
- Each rule must be linked to:\par
  - A request or change ID (e.g., ticket number).\par
  - A named System Owner.\par
  - The approver(s).\par
\par
Separation of Duties:\par
- Firewall Administrator cannot approve their own change.\par
- At least one additional role (System Owner or IT/Security Lead) must approve.\par
\par
5. APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS\par
5.1 Standard / Lower-Risk Changes\par
Examples:\par
- Allowing a specific port between known internal systems.\par
- Tightening existing access (reducing IP ranges or ports).\par
\par
Approval:\par
- System Owner approval.\par
- IT/Security Lead review for:\par
  - Any external (internet or third-party) access, or\par
  - Any new service/port not previously used.\par
\par
5.2 Higher-Risk Changes\par
Examples:\par
- New inbound access from the internet.\par
- New access from external partners or vendors.\par
- Rules with broad IP ranges or multiple ports.\par
\par
Approval:\par
- System Owner approval.\par
- IT/Security Lead approval.\par
- If risk is significant (sensitive data, broad impact), IT/Security Lead informs or seeks approval from an Executive Sponsor (e.g., CTO/COO).\par
\par
5.3 Temporary / Exception Rules\par
- Must have clear justification and a defined expiration date.\par
- Marked as temporary/exception.\par
- Approved by IT/Security Lead and System Owner.\par
\par
5.4 Emergency Changes\par
Use only to restore critical service or respond to a security incident.\par
\par
Process:\par
- Firewall Administrator may implement after verbal or written approval from System Owner or IT/Security Lead (preferably both).\par
- Within 24 hours:\par
  - Formal request/change is documented.\par
  - IT/Security Lead reviews and confirms as permanent (after full review) or modifies/removes the rule.\par
\par
6. FIREWALL RULE CHANGE PROCEDURE\par
This procedure applies to all changes, including additions, modifications, and removals.\par
\par
Step 1 – Request Submission\par
The Requestor submits a request/change including:\par
- Business justification.\par
- Source address(es) or range(s).\par
- Destination address(es) or range(s) or system names.\par
- Ports and protocols.\par
- Direction (inbound, outbound, internal).\par
- Environment (production, test, development).\par
- Temporary or permanent (if temporary, include end date).\par
- Preferred implementation time.\par
\par
Step 2 – Review and Approval\par
System Owner:\par
- Confirms the need for access.\par
- Confirms systems and data involved.\par
\par
IT/Security Lead:\par
- Validates least privilege (minimal IPs, ports, and protocols).\par
- Evaluates security and compliance impact.\par
- Approves or rejects the change.\par
\par
No implementation occurs without recorded approval, except for documented emergency changes.\par
\par
Step 3 – Implementation\par
Firewall Administrator:\par
- Ensures there is a way to revert changes (e.g., previous configuration or clear rollback plan).\par
- Implements rule following defined naming and ordering standards.\par
- Enables rule logging according to logging standards.\par
\par
Step 4 – Testing\par
Requestor and/or System Owner:\par
- Confirms the application or service functions correctly after the change.\par
\par
If issues occur, the Firewall Administrator reverts the change or adjusts as needed.\par
\par
Step 5 – Documentation and Closure\par
Firewall Administrator records:\par
- The rule name/identifier.\par
- Final configuration details at a high level (e.g., Source X to Destination Y on port Z).\par
- Implementation date/time.\par
\par
The request/change is closed only after successful verification.\par
\par
7. RULE DOCUMENTATION STANDARDS\par
Each firewall rule must have:\par
- Rule Name/ID (consistent naming convention including system, environment, and direction).\par
- Description (purpose of the rule and reference to request/change ID).\par
- Owner (System Owner or team).\par
- Creation Date.\par
- Status (Standard / Exception / Temporary / Emergency).\par
- Expiration Date for temporary or exception rules (or None for ongoing rules).\par
\par
8. PERIODIC FIREWALL RULE REVIEW\par
8.1 Frequency\par
- Production and external-facing rules: reviewed at least every 6 months.\par
- Internal/non-production rules: reviewed at least annually.\par
- Temporary and exception rules: reviewed at or before their expiration date.\par
\par
8.2 Review Responsibilities\par
- IT/Security Lead coordinates the review.\par
- System Owners review rules related to their systems.\par
\par
8.3 Review Checklist\par
For each rule, reviewers must determine:\par
- Is the rule still required?\par
- Can access be further restricted (narrower IP ranges, fewer ports, limited direction)?\par
- Is the System Owner information accurate?\par
- Is the rule redundant with another rule?\par
- Is logging appropriate and enabled where required?\par
\par
Each rule is marked with an outcome: Keep as is, Tighten, or Remove.\par
Changes resulting from the review follow the standard change procedure.\par
\par
9. MONITORING AND COMPLIANCE\par
- Firewalls must log security-relevant events (e.g., denied traffic, activity on external-facing rules) in line with company logging standards.\par
- Logs should be sent or made available to a central logging or monitoring capability where feasible.\par
- IT/Security Lead periodically reviews firewall-related logs for repeated denied traffic patterns and suspicious activity.\par
- Unauthorized or non-compliant rules may be escalated to management and modified or removed after assessing business impact.\par
\par
10. EXCEPTIONS\par
- Any exception to this policy must be documented in a request/change record.\par
- It must include specific justification and identified risks.\par
- It must be approved by the IT/Security Lead and, if high risk, an Executive Sponsor.\par
- It must have a defined expiration or review date.\par

}