{\rtf1\ansi
FIREWALL CHANGE & REVIEW CHECKLIST\par
\par
FOR REQUESTORS\par
[ ] Business justification is clearly stated.\par
[ ] Source IP addresses or ranges are specified.\par
[ ] Destination IP addresses/ranges or system names are specified.\par
[ ] Required ports and protocols are specified.\par
[ ] Traffic direction is identified (inbound/outbound/internal).\par
[ ] Environment is identified (production/test/development).\par
[ ] Temporary vs permanent is specified (if temporary, an end date is provided).\par
\par
FOR APPROVERS (SYSTEM OWNER & IT/SECURITY LEAD)\par
[ ] Request matches a legitimate business need.\par
[ ] Access follows least privilege (minimal IPs, ports, protocols).\par
[ ] External/third-party access is clearly identified and justified.\par
[ ] Risk level is assessed (standard vs higher-risk vs exception).\par
[ ] For higher-risk changes, Executive Sponsor is informed/approves if required.\par
[ ] Temporary/exception rules have a clear expiration/review date.\par
\par
FOR FIREWALL ADMINISTRATORS\par
[ ] A rollback plan or previous configuration is available.\par
[ ] Rule naming convention is followed.\par
[ ] Rule ordering is correct (no unintended overrides).\par
[ ] Logging is enabled per standards for this rule.\par
[ ] Change is implemented during an appropriate window.\par
\par
POST-IMPLEMENTATION TESTING\par
[ ] Requestor/System Owner confirms the service works as expected.\par
[ ] No unexpected connectivity or security issues were observed.\par
[ ] Ticket/change record includes final rule details and implementation time.\par
\par
PERIODIC REVIEW (RULE-BY-RULE)\par
For each existing rule:\par
[ ] Rule is still required.\par
[ ] IP ranges and ports are as narrow as possible.\par
[ ] System Owner is correct and up to date.\par
[ ] Rule is not redundant with any other rule.\par
[ ] Logging for this rule is appropriate and enabled.\par
[ ] Outcome recorded: Keep as is / Tighten / Remove.\par
[ ] Follow-up changes are logged as new change requests if needed.\par

}